docs: add state transition function handbook (#295)
lambdaclass/lambda_ethereum_consensus: docs/handbooks/state_transition.md

> # State Transition LECC Handbook

Reviewer: what does LECC mean?

Author: Lambda Ethereum Consensus Client

Before delving into the LECC state transition functions implementation, ensure you've covered the following:

- **Complete Reading**: Go through this entire document.
- **Relevant Documentation**: Familiarize yourself with related documentation. Relevant links are provided in the "References" section.
- **Comprehension**: Understand the mechanics and purpose of what you're about to implement. Ensure you can explain it to others.
- **Context**: Grasp why the implementation is necessary and its significance to the project.
- **Seek Clarifications**: If in doubt, don't hesitate to ask questions in the [Telegram group](https://t.me/lambdaconsensus).
- **Testing**: Ensure your implementation passes the relevant tests.
- **Optimization**: Strive for efficiency in your code.
## Introduction

The State Transition function lies at the heart of blockchains, driving their evolution. It transitions an initial state \( S0 \) into a subsequent state \( S1 \), as defined by:

$$S' = f(S, B)$$

Here, \( S' \) denotes the state after applying the State Transition function \( f \) to a State \( S \)  applying a Signed Beacon Block \( B \).

> The Ethereum POS Beacon Chain has evolved its state transition function compared to its predecessor in Ethereum POW. Ethereum POW was **block-driven**, while the Beacon Chain is now **slot-driven**. This signifies that a state transition occurs every slot (currently every 12 seconds), irrespective of whether a block is received.

Author: If I understand correctly than yes i have talked added information in the [!IMPORTANT] code block under this paragraph.

    block = signed_block.message
    # Process slots (including those with no blocks) since block
    process_slots(state, block.slot)
    # Verify signature
    if validate_result:
        assert verify_block_signature(state, signed_block)
    # Process block
    process_block(state, block)
    # Verify state root
    if validate_result:
        assert block.state_root == hash_tree_root(state)
```

### Signature

| Parameter       | Type                 | Description                                 |
|-----------------|----------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| `state`         | `BeaconState`        | Describes the current state of the client.  |
| `signed_block`  | `SignedBeaconBlock`  | Represents the newly received block.        |
| `validate_result` | `boolean`          | If validation is required; default is true.     |
| Return Value    | `None`               | As it's a pure function, no value is returned. |

>[!IMPORTANT]
>In this example the return value is `None` because of the use of Python being an OOP language. Elixir being a functional language makes:
>1. data immutable

> >2. mandatory for functions to return

Reviewer: you could return "nil" in Elixir. The reason we change the signature is only because data is immutable and we can't change the content of the beacon state.

Author: I see, I have added the info related to pure functions and immutability.

# State Transition Handbook

Before delving into the state transition function implementation, ensure you've covered the following:

- **Complete Reading**: Go through this entire document.
- **Relevant Documentation**: Familiarize yourself with related documentation. Relevant links are provided in the "References" section.
- **Comprehension**: Understand the mechanics and purpose of what you're about to implement. Ensure you can explain it to others.
- **Context**: Grasp why the implementation is necessary and its significance to the project.
- **Seek Clarifications**: If in doubt, don't hesitate to ask questions in the [Telegram group](https://t.me/lambdaconsensus).
- **Testing**: Ensure your implementation passes the relevant tests.

## Introduction

The State Transition function lies at the heart of blockchains, driving their evolution. It transitions an initial state $S_0$ into a subsequent state $S_1$, as defined by:

$$S' = f(S, B)$$

> Here, \( S' \) denotes the state after applying the State Transition function \( f \) to a State \( S \)  applying a Signed Beacon Block \( B \).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here, $S'$ denotes the state after applying the State Transition function $f$ to a State $S$  applying a Signed Beacon Block $B$.
```

# State Transition Handbook

> Before delving into the LECC state transition functions implementation, ensure you've covered the following:

Reviewer 2: We should mention the full name at first along with the abbreviation, like:
``` suggestion
Before delving into the LECC (Lambda Ethereum Consensus Client) state transition functions implementation, ensure you've covered the following:
```

- **Complete Reading**: Go through this entire document.
- **Relevant Documentation**: Familiarize yourself with related documentation. Relevant links are provided in the "References" section.
- **Comprehension**: Understand the mechanics and purpose of what you're about to implement. Ensure you can explain it to others.
- **Context**: Grasp why the implementation is necessary and its significance to the project.
- **Seek Clarifications**: If in doubt, don't hesitate to ask questions in the [Telegram group](https://t.me/lambdaconsensus).
- **Testing**: Ensure your implementation passes the relevant tests.

> - **Optimization**: Strive for efficiency in your code.

Reviewer 2: >- **Optimization**: Strive for efficiency in your code.

We shouldn't mention this because we don't really want efficiency from the get-go (just sensible performance). Once the client is fully working we can do some benchmarks and optimize it.

## Introduction

> The State Transition function lies at the heart of blockchains, driving their evolution. It transitions an initial state \( S0 \) into a subsequent state \( S1 \), as defined by:

Reviewer 2: You can use surrounding single `$` to use the math font like: $S_1$ (`$S_1$`)

```suggestion
The State Transition function lies at the heart of blockchains, driving their evolution. It transitions an initial state $S_0$ into a subsequent state $S_1$, as defined by:
```

### Declaration

The `state_transition` function is declared as follows:

```python
def state_transition(state: BeaconState, signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, validate_result: bool=True) -> None:
    block = signed_block.message
    # Process slots (including those with no blocks) since block
    process_slots(state, block.slot)
    # Verify signature
    if validate_result:
        assert verify_block_signature(state, signed_block)
    # Process block
    process_block(state, block)
    # Verify state root
    if validate_result:
        assert block.state_root == hash_tree_root(state)
```

### Signature

| Parameter       | Type                 | Description                                 |
|-----------------|----------------------|---------------------------------------------|
| `state`         | `BeaconState`        | Describes the current state of the client.  |
| `signed_block`  | `SignedBeaconBlock`  | Represents the newly received block.        |
| `validate_result` | `boolean`          | If validation is required; default is true.     |

> | Return Value    | `None`               | As it's a pure function, no value is returned. |

Reviewer 2: > As it's a pure function, no value is returned.

This doesn't have anything to do with it being pure. It's because results are returned in other ways: the state transition happens in-place, and any errors are raised (as exceptions).

>[!IMPORTANT]
>In this example the return value is `None` because of the use of Python being an OOP language. Elixir being a functional language makes:
>1. data immutable
>2. mandatory for functions to return
>
>Hence here LECC would return a new updated `BeaconState`.

### Implementation 

- Extracting the block message from the `SignedBeaconBlock`:
  ```python
  block = signed_block.message
  ```

- Processing slots:
  ```python
  process_slots(state, block.slot)
  ```

- If `validate_result` is true, the block signature is verified:
  ```python
  assert verify_block_signature(state, signed_block)
  ```

- The block is then processed:
  ```python
  process_block(state, block)
  ```

- Lastly, if `validate_result` is true, the state root is verified:
  ```python
  assert block.state_root == hash_tree_root(state)
  ```

### Additional information

- The third core piece of the consensus layer state transition function is contained in the `process_slots` function. It's the `process_epoch` function. [See declaration](https://eth2book.info/capella/annotated-spec/#def_process_slots)

> - The `SignedBeaconBlock` is a secure wrapper around the `BeaconBlock` container it is one of the two fundamental container of a consensus client with `BeaconState`. `BeaconBlock` is the  container used by the leader to communicate network updates to all other validators. `BeaconState` are the states of the chain kept internally by the clients, updated through the application of new `BeaconBlock`s. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The `SignedBeaconBlock` is a signed wrapper around the `BeaconBlock` container – one of the two fundamental containers of a consensus client, along with `BeaconState`. `BeaconBlock` is the container the leader uses to communicate network updates to all other nodes. `BeaconState`s are the chain states kept internally by each client, updated through the application of new `BeaconBlock`s. 
```
